---
title: "Root Exudates Promote Biosynthetic and Metabolic Pathways in the Nitrogen-Fixing Actinobacteria Frankia"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2014-02-01-talk-2
date: 2025-08-04
location: "Merida, Yucatan, MX"
---

[More information here](https://ismelat2025.org/about-the-congress/)

Actinorhizal plants form a symbiotic association with nitrogen-fixing actinobacteria
Frankia, leading to the development of root nodules. The symbiotic interaction begins
with an exchange of signals between the host plant and the bacteria. A molecule
present in root exudates from Casuarina glauca plants induced molecular and
physiological changes in Frankia, including the ability to establish root nodules
significantly earlier than untreated cells. The presence of an extracellular signaling
molecule(s) produced by the exudates-treated Frankia was identified using a bioassay
with transgenic C. glauca plants and specific genetic markers in the nodulation
pathway. The global gene expression via RNA Seq was determined in response to host-
specific (C. glauca) exudates compared to the control (BD medium) and nonhost (
Hippophae rhamnoides) exudates over several days (1, 2, 3, and 5). Differentially
expressed genes were further analyzed using antiSMASH and BlastKOALA, where an
increase in biosynthetic and metabolic pathways was observed after exposure to root
exudates. Several genes were significantly upregulated (p-value < 0.05, fold change>
2), belonging to the biosynthetic gene clusters for lanthipeptide production and
polyketide synthases across the various days for both root exudate treatments. An
increase in pathways involved in various metabolic pathways, such as carbon and
amino acid metabolism, was also observed. These findings demonstrate that
treatment of Frankia casuarinae with host plant root exudates increases the
expression of pathways involved in metabolism and the biosynthesis of secondary
metabolite, furthering the understanding of the early stages of actinorhizal symbiosis.